Hello, my name is Bill Baker and in this video we are continuing our tour of tsOffline,
the analysis software developed at the US Army Institute of Surgical Research.

In this tutorial, we will be segmenting the ECG signal and preparing to looking at both
standard and novel approaches to physiologic waveform analysis.  We will be
continuing with the data set for Active Duty Normal soldiers from 
the cardiology department of Brooke Army Medical Center.

If you completed our first tutorial, then the data session that we will be 
using will be in the list of Recently Opened Files, found in the File menu.
Select the session file for BAMC subject 0049, a 34 yo M.

--------

As we have seen previously, our data of interest begins close to
the middle of the dataset.  Much of the data before that
point consists of preparation of the patient, placement of the catheter, and 
calibration of the data capture system.  As a quick review, we can drag the
timeline indicator to a point of interest and use the "+" key to zoom in on features.

In this video, we will segment the ECG signal using the R wave as the fiducial marker
which is a prerequisite for some of the analysis methods.

To segment the ECG signal, select Run/Analysis, ECG Segmentation and Next.  Our 
source _device_ will be the file that we have opened, the source _signal_ will be 
the ECG waveform, and data will be segmented using the PT1 algorithm, which is the
original Pan Thompkins algorithm.  Press Next.

----------

The lines that appear over the top of the graphs are the ECG R wave indicators
found by PT1.  The R wave indicators are number sequentially.  This algorithm has
identified 1000's of R waves in this dataset.  The segmentation data is segregated 
into a layer which overlays our ECG and pressure waveforms.  It is possible to have
multiple separate layers overlaying  the graphs.  These overlays may include 
information such as R waves, phases of the study, significant study events, anomolies,
and other points of interest in the data.

The available overlay layers are displayed in the toolbar at the top of the screen.
The small square box beside the layer name indicates the color of the layer and 
it's state.  Layers can be toggled between three states by clicking on the layer name: 
visible, editable, and not visible.  Only one layer is editable at a time.

There are several ways to edit a layer.  When a layer is editable, a small 
circular ball will appear close to the bottom of each position indicator.  Click twice to
make this layer editable.  The mouse
can be used to select this feature and drag the indicator from one position
to another. 

Once an indicator is selected with the mouse, we can move it or
deleted by pressing the "Delete" key.  We can also manually insert additional R-wave 
indicators into the layer that is being currently edited.  

The position of the new R indicator will depend on a several
factors.  First, activate the ECG signal as the active signal.  Next select one of three
position modifiers.  These modifiers will cause the R
wave to be placed at a local Maximum or local minimum in the ECG signal.  We can also 
select the modifier that disregards the active signal and places the indicator exactly
where the mouse is positioned.  Regardless of these settings, we can always drag
the indicator to the desired position.  Select the "local maximum" modifier.  Move the 
mouse to the desired R-wave position, and press the "R" key.

Pressing the R key actually causes two actions to be performed: first, it deletes
any R-wave indicators within a 50ms window, it then inserts a new R wave 
indicator according to the position modifier just described. 

-----------

Although we have thorough coverage of the data set with indicators, we are really only 
interested in a small area for our study.  And to reduce confusion and clutter, we can
remove the excess indicators.  Scrolling through the display, we pick a position
of interest and decide to remove all the indicators before that position.  I've chosen 
the indicator at sequence number 1901.  

Select View/Annotations.  [CUT] The R-wave indicator is one type of annotation.
Select the first annotation to be removed, scroll through the table and press
SHIFT while selecting the last annotation to be removed, right click and select
DELETE.  [CUT]  We have now removed the first 1900 of our indicators
and the remainder have been renumbered.  Select "OK" and let's review the data.

Scrolling through the data, we can see again the sequence number of the R wave at
the top of the screen and the letter R telling us the annotation type.
At the bottom of the graph is the relative time in the study, such as 33 
minutes and 16 seconds since data recording was started.  At the very bottom, we have
the timeline showing the year,month,day and clock time, as well as our relative
position inside the entire dataset.

We can now drag the timeline indicator to
find the position where data of interest is no longer being captured.  [X-CUT] It appears
that the data after R-wave indicator number 1600 is no longer of interest, so we repeat
the procedure used previously to remove all indicators after 1600.

Select View/Annotations.  [CUT] Scroll down to the first annotation that we wish to remove,
approximately 1600, and select this item.  Scroll 
to the bottom of the table, press SHIFT while selecting the last item, right click
and select DELETE.  [CUT]

Now select OK to close the dialog.

---------


Now we have a large dataset of pressure waveforms, the ECG signal, and R wave
annotations.  Some of these values are scaled off the screen, so if we move
the mouse position indicator over the ECG graph and press "C", the ECG signal is now
centered in the display area as we wish again.  Let's center the pressure waves as well.
Press "C" to center all the displayed data.

[XCUT]
  
The Pan Thompkins algorithm that we used to create the segmentation is not as 
precise as we might wish.  Lets zoom in on one of the
R-wave peaks and see how well it did.  [??XCUT] We notice a slight offset 
from the R-wave peak to the actual indicator.  This offset 
is somewhat uniform throughout the data, trailing the peak by 10 to 12 milliseconds
and sometimes further.  We can correct the indicator position using "Auto-adjust".  
Right-click over the graph and select the Auto-adjust menu item.  

Select the feature "ECG Segmentation: PT1".  Our reference signal, will be the ECG waveform
and align this feature with a local maximum of the ECG signal 
within a tolerance of 40 ms.  This procedure will correct the R-wave
indicators to correspond with the maximum of each ECG peak.

-----------

Now that we have segmented our ECG and pressure waveforms, we are ready for additional
analysis which we will be covering in subsequent demonstrations.

--------


Select "File/Save Session" to store the R-wave indicators.  Name the file, tutorial 2.  
This concludes the ECG segmentation tutorial.
